---
layout: post
title:  "Webhooks in Kubernetes"
date:   2021-03-14 10:11:20 +0200
categories: k8s
comments: true
---
Webhooks are a way to "intercept" requests to the k8s apiserver on their way from the apiserver's HTTP handler to etcd persistency. There are two types of webhooks:
* Admission webhooks (includes mutating and validating webhooks)
* Conversion webhooks


Like the name already says, mutating webhooks will modify submitted resources before they are persisted (e.g. filling in default values etc.). Validating webhooks will validate field values of a submitted resource but not change them. Conversion webhooks will convert between different versions of the same CRD for compatibility. 

## Serving Webhooks
Webhooks need to be served by a HTTP server so that the k8s apiserver can send requests to it. For admission webhooks, the POST requests have a `AdmissionReview` struct serialized to JSON as body. For conversion webhooks, a `ConversionReview` struct is used. Similarly, response bodies serialized the same structs to JSON. 

The webhook server is a k8s `Deployment`, with a service wrapping it. For admission webhooks, the service is referenced in an admission webhook configuration from the `admissionregistration.k8s.io` API. This configuration also specifies invocation rules e.g. for which CRUD operation, which api groups, versions or resources an admission webhook should be used. The following configuration taken from [the k8s docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/#webhook-configuration) is an example:
```yaml
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1
kind: ValidatingWebhookConfiguration
...
webhooks:
- name: my-webhook.example.com
  clientConfig:
    caBundle: "Ci0tLS0tQk...<base64-encoded PEM bundle containing the CA that signed the webhook's serving certificate>...tLS0K"
    service:
      namespace: my-service-namespace
      name: my-service-name
      path: /my-path
      port: 1234
  rules:
  - operations: ["CREATE", "UPDATE"]
    apiGroups: ["apps"]
    apiVersions: ["v1", "v1beta1"]
    resources: ["deployments", "replicasets"]
    scope: "Namespaced"
  ...
```
For conversion webhooks, the service is directly referenced in the CRD and there is no separate configuration file. This is described in the next section. 

## Multiversion support of CRDs and Webhooks
When several versions are present, some things need to be specified in the CRD yaml:
1. Is custom logic necessary for conversion between different CRD versions? If there are schema changes from one version to the other, conversion webhooks should be used to implement conversion logic.
2. In which version are the resources persisted? When a resource is created, it is persisted in a version selected as the storage version. This means that the stored version of the resource can be different from the one requested via `kubectl get resource.version.group` (when no version is specified, e.g. in `kubectl get resource`, kubectl will use the latest version by default). Reading from storage will not automatically changed the stored version and when a new storage version is set, there is no automatic process that converts the stored resources to the new storage version. The conversion will only happen when a stored resource is updated.
3. Which versions are supported? As new versions are added, older versions can be disabled.

The following yaml taken from [the k8s docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definition-versioning/#webhook-conversion) is an example CRD:
```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  # name must match the spec fields below, and be in the form: <plural>.<group>
  name: crontabs.example.com
spec:
  # group name to use for REST API: /apis/<group>/<version>
  group: example.com
  # list of versions supported by this CustomResourceDefinition
  versions:
  - name: v1beta1
    # Each version can be enabled/disabled by Served flag.
    served: true
    # One and only one version must be marked as the storage version.
    storage: true
    # A schema is required
    schema:
      openAPIV3Schema:
        type: object
        properties:
          ...
  - name: v1
    served: true
    storage: false
    schema:
      openAPIV3Schema:
        type: object
        properties:
          ...
  # The conversion section is introduced in Kubernetes 1.13+ with a default value of
  # None conversion (strategy sub-field set to None).
  conversion:
    # None conversion assumes the same schema for all versions and only sets the apiVersion
    # field of custom resources to the proper value
    strategy: None
  # either Namespaced or Cluster
  scope: Namespaced
  names:
    # plural name to be used in the URL: /apis/<group>/<version>/<plural>
    plural: crontabs
    # singular name to be used as an alias on the CLI and for display
    singular: crontab
    # kind is normally the CamelCased singular type. Your resource manifests use this.
    kind: CronTab
    # shortNames allow shorter string to match your resource on the CLI
    shortNames:
    - ct
```

## Using Webhooks with Controller-Runtime
Let us now look at the inclusion of webhooks in `controller-runtime`. The starting point here is again the manager. When a manager is created, you can pass webhook-relevant config such as the port, host and certificate directory of the webhook server. After the manager is created, you add the webhook server to it:
```golang
import (
  ctrl "sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime"
)
mgr, _ := ctrl.NewManager(<config>)
ctrl.NewWebhookManagedBy(mgr).
  For(<your crd>).
  Complete()
```
Under the hood, `NewWebhookManagedBy()` will return a builder that checks if your CRD implements the `Defaulter` (mutating webhook) and/or `Validator` (validating webhook) interfaces.

```golang
/* pkg/webhook/admission */
```

If it does, it generates paths for your webhooks and registers the implemented interface functions as handlers to a `http.ServeMux` HTTP request multiplexer.

For conversion webhooks, the builder checks if one of your CRD versions implements the `Hub` interface and if all other versions implement the `Convertible` interface. 

```golang
/* pkg/webhook/conversion.go */
```

Hubs and convertibles (or spokes) are a concept used by `controller-runtime` to reduce the combinatorial complexity of conversions. Imagine we have a three CRD versions: `v1`, `v2`, `v3`. Assume our hub version is `v2`, and a resource is persisted as `v1`. We now query the resource, but as `v3` with `kubectl get myresource.v3.mygroup`. What happens is that `v1` from the storage is converted into the hub version `v2` and from there to the target version `v3`. To do so, we need to define how `v1` and `v3` can be converted to and from `v2`, and that is what the interface `Convertible` does. The introduction of a hub version eliminates the need to write logic for all possible version pairs.

After all the configuration is done, the manager starts up the webhook server. Most of the server-side implementation can be found in `pkg/builder/webhook.go`, `pkg/webhook/server.go` and `pkg/webhook/conversion/conversion.go`. 

The webhook deployment in `controller-runtime` is part of the manager deployment. All that is left to do is to create a service yaml and to refer to the service in the admission webhook configuration or CRD yaml. `kubebuilder` will generate these yaml files for you and patch them together for you with `kustomize`, but for learning purposes, it is always best to see how everything fits together manually.

## Resources
* https://banzaicloud.com/blog/k8s-admission-webhooks/
* https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/
* https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definition-versioning/